Extending kubernetes api in process part 2 (#6)
slinkydeveloper/slinkydeveloper.github.io: source/_posts/2020-10-08-Kubernetes-controllers-The-Empire-Strikes-Back.md

---
title: Kubernetes controllers - The Empire Strikes Back

> description: In this blog post I want to introduce you some important steps forward we made in our Extending Kubernetes API In-Process project. We implemented an high level watch ABI method, we made the host asynchronous, we invoke the controllers only on-demand without wasting resources and we finally use the full-fledged kube-runtime to create the controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: In this blog post I want to introduce you to some important steps forward we made in our Extending Kubernetes API In-Process project. We implemented an high level watch ABI, we made the host asynchronous, we invoke the controllers only on-demand without wasting resources and we finally use the full-fledged kube-runtime to create the controllers.
```

date: 2020-10-08 19:42:09
tags: cloud, kubernetes, rust, webassembly
---

> In this blog post I want to introduce you some important steps forward we made in our [Extending Kubernetes API In-Process project](https://github.com/slinkydeveloper/extending-kubernetes-api-in-process-poc). If you don't know what I'm talking about, check out the previous post: [Kubernetes Controllers - A new hope](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post I want to introduce you to some important steps forward we made in our [Extending Kubernetes API In-Process project](https://github.com/slinkydeveloper/extending-kubernetes-api-in-process-poc). If you don't know what I'm talking about, check out the previous post: [Kubernetes Controllers - A new hope](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope).
```

> We implemented a high-level ABI method to start watchers on Kubernetes resources, as argued in [Next steps](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope#Next-Steps) paragraph. This allows us to identify, _at a high level_, the watchers configured by controllers and deduplicate watch requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We implemented the high-level ABI to start watchers on Kubernetes resources, as argued in [Next steps](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope#Next-Steps). This allows us to identify watch requests sent by controllers and to deduplicate them.
```

> Then we worked on modifying our ABI to make it **asynchronous**, in order to invoke the controllers only **on-demand**. Now, we don't spin a thread up for each module, but we wakeup controllers asynchronously when there is a new task to process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we worked on modifying our ABI to make it **asynchronous**, in order to invoke the controllers only **on-demand**. Now, we don't spin up a thread for each module but we wake controllers up asynchronously when there is a new task to process.
```

> Thanks to these changes, we're now able to use Rust `async`/`await` inside the module. This allowed us to realign our fork of `kube-rs`, bringing back all the original interfaces, and run `kube-runtime` inside the modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to these changes, we're now able to use Rust's `async`/`await` inside the module. This allowed us to realign our fork of `kube-rs`, bringing back all the original interfaces, and run `kube-runtime` inside the modules.
```

## The `kube-watch-abi` ABI

The `kube-watch-abi` ABI was originally composed by an import and an export:

```rust
#[link(wasm_import_module = "kube-watch-abi")]
extern "C" {
    // Returns the watch identifier
    fn watch(watch_req_ptr: *const u8, watch_req_len: usize) -> u64;
}

#[no_mangle]
pub extern "C" fn on_event(watch_id: u64, ev_ptr: *const u8, ev_len: usize) {
    // handle event
}
```

The `watch_req` is a description of the watch to register:

```rust
pub(crate) struct WatchRequest {
    pub(crate) resource: Resource,
    pub(crate) watch_params: WatchParams
}
```

### Controller

When the module invokes the `watch` import, it registers a new watch and returns a watch identifier. This identifier is stored together with a reference to the `Stream<WatchEvent>` in a global map.

> In a similar fashion to `request` ABI discussed in the [previous post](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope#The-ABI), we serialize `WatchRequest` data structure in order to pass it to the host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In similar fashion to the `request` ABI discussed in the [previous post](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope#The-ABI), we serialize the `WatchRequest` data structure in order to pass it to the host.
```

> Then, every time the host has a new `WatchEvent` that controller needs to handle, it will invoke `on_event` with the serialized `WatchEvent`. Using the watch identifier, the controller will get back from the global map the associated `Stream` and append to it the deserialized `WatchEvent`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, every time the host has a new `WatchEvent` that the controller needs to handle, it will invoke `on_event` with the serialized `WatchEvent`. Using the watch identifier, the controller will get the associated `Stream` from the global map and append the deserialized `WatchEvent` to it.
```

### The host

When the controller invokes `watch`, the host checks if there is a registered watch for that resource. If there is, then it just registers the invoker as interested to that watch, otherwise it starts a new watch.

> Every time a watch receives a new event from Kubernetes, the host resolves all the modules interested to that particular event. For each module, it allocates some module memory to pass the event and it finally wake up again the controller with `on_event`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every time a watch receives a new event from Kubernetes, the host resolves all the modules interested to that particular event. For each module, it allocates some module memory to pass the event and it finally wakes the controller up by calling `on_event`.
```

## Rust module with async-await

### Callbacks are bad!

> The `kube-watch-abi` is de-facto an asynchronous API: `watch` starts the asynchronous operation, `on_event` notifies the completion of the operation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `kube-watch-abi` is the de-facto an asynchronous API: `watch` starts the asynchronous operation, `on_event` notifies  on the completion of the operation. 
```

In the initial implementation of the `watch`, on module side, I just modified the kube client `watch` to provide a callback:

```rust
pub fn watch<F: 'static + Fn(WatchEvent<K>) + Send>(&self, lp: &ListParams, version: &str, callback: F) {
    // Invoke watch
}
```

Every time `on_event` was invoked, the module resolved the callback from the watch identifier and invoked it.

> This is fine as initial approach, but we soon hit a problem: porting all the existing Kubernetes client and runtime code from `async`/`await` to the more _primitive_ callbacks could have caused a lot of issues, making the fork too much divergent from the upstream code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was fine as an initial approach, but we soon hit a problem: Porting all of the existing Kubernetes client and runtime code from `async`/`await` to the more _primitive_ callbacks could have caused a lot of issues, making the fork diverage too much from the upstream code.
```

### How `async`/`await` works

> Here's for you a little refresh on `async`/`await` from [Asynchronous Programming in Rust book](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/01_getting_started/04_async_await_primer.html):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a little refresh on `async`/`await` from [Asynchronous Programming in Rust book](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/01_getting_started/04_async_await_primer.html):
```

{% cq %}
async/.await is Rust's built-in tool for writing asynchronous functions that look like synchronous code. async transforms a block of code into a state machine that implements a trait called Future. Whereas calling a blocking function in a synchronous method would block the whole thread, blocked Futures will yield control of the thread, allowing other Futures to run._
{% endcq %}

> Although there are a lot of details about how Rust implements the `async`/`await` feature, I'm gonna try to summarize the concepts we need for this post:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although there are a lot of details about how Rust implements the `async`/`await` feature, these are the relevant concepts for this post:
```

* `Future` is the type that represents an asynchronous result, e.g. `async fn` returns a `Future`. You can wait for the result of a `Future` using `.await`.
* `Stream` is the same as `Future`, but it returns several elements before `None`, which notifies the end of the stream.
* In order to use `.await`, you **must** be in an `async` code block.
* In order to run an `async` code block, you need to use a task executor.

For example:

```rust
use futures::executor::LocalPool;

fn main() {
    // Create the executor
    let mut pool = LocalPool::new();

    // Spawn an async task
    poll.spawner().spawn(async {
        // execute `my_async_fn()` and await for the result
        my_async_fn().await
    });    

    // Block the main thread until all the tasks are done
    pool.run();
}
```

> If you want to know more about it, I encourage you to look at the [Asynchronous Programming in Rust book](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/01_getting_started/01_chapter.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> In our `async`/`await` implementation we implemented the `Future` and `Stream` traits, we reused [LocalPool](https://docs.rs/futures/0.3.6/futures/executor/struct.LocalPool.html) from `futures` crate as task executor, and we generalized `on_event` to notify the asynchronous operation completion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our `async`/`await` implementation we implemented the `Future` and `Stream` traits, we reused [LocalPool](https://docs.rs/futures/0.3.6/futures/executor/struct.LocalPool.html) from the `futures` crate as a task executor, and we generalized `on_event` to notify the asynchronous operation completion.
```

### The controller lifecycle

We first analyzed the controller lifecycle:

1. When host invokes `run`, the controller starts a bunch of watchers and then it waits for new events

> 2. Every time a new event comes in, the host wakeup again the controller with `on_event` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Every time a new event comes in, the host wakes the controller up by calling `on_event` 
```

> This means that during the `run` phase, the controller starts a bunch of asynchronous tasks, one or more of them waiting for asynchronous events. After the `run` phase completes, **there is no need to keep the module running**. When we wakeup again the controller, we need to check for any tasks that can continue and run them up to the point where we have all the tasks waiting for an external event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that during the `run` phase, the controller starts a bunch of asynchronous tasks, one or more of them waiting for asynchronous events. After the `run` phase completes, **there is no need to keep the module running**. When we wake the controller up again, we need to check for any tasks that can continue and run them up to the point where we have all the tasks waiting for an external event.
```

> To implement this lifecycle, we just need to execute both on `run` and `on_event` the executor method [`run_until_stalled()`](https://docs.rs/futures/0.3.6/futures/executor/struct.LocalPool.html#method.run_until_stalled), which will run all tasks in the executor pool and returns if no more progress can be made on any task. This allows us to implement the `run` as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement this lifecycle, we need to execute both on `run` and on `on_event` the executor method [`run_until_stalled()`](https://docs.rs/futures/0.3.6/futures/executor/struct.LocalPool.html#method.run_until_stalled), which will run all tasks in the executor pool and returns if no more progress can be made on any task. This allows us to implement `run` as follows:
```

        if shared_state.completed {
            Poll::Ready(shared_state.value.take())
        } else {
            shared_state.waker = Some(cx.waker().clone());
            Poll::Pending
        }
    }
}
```

A similar implementation exists for the `Stream` trait. To create a `Future`, we use this method:

```rust
pub fn start_future(async_operation_id: u64) -> AbiFuture {
    // Create the future state
    let state = Arc::new(Mutex::new(
        AbiFutureState {
            value: None,
            completed: false,
            waker: None
        }
    ));
    // Insert in the global map of pending future states this future state
    get_pending_futures().deref().borrow_mut().insert(async_operation_id, state.clone());

    // Return the new future
    AbiFuture {
        shared_state: state
    }
}
```

### Generalizing `on_event` to `wakeup_future`/`wakeup_stream`

At this point, we took the concept of `on_event` and generalized to `async`/`await`, introducing `wakeup_future`/`wakeup_stream` ABI exports.
Every time the controller invokes an asynchronous ABI import (like `watch`), it gets the identifier that we use to instantiate our `Future`/`Stream` implementation.

> When the host completed the asynchronous operation, it invokes `wakeup_future`/`wakeup_stream`. The controller marks the `Future`/`Stream` as completed, including the result value, and invokes again `LocalPool::run_until_stalled()` to wakeup tasks waiting for that future/stream to complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the host completed the asynchronous operation, it invokes `wakeup_future`/`wakeup_stream`. The controller marks the `Future`/`Stream` as completed, including the result value, and invokes `LocalPool::run_until_stalled()` to wake up tasks waiting for that future/stream to complete.
```

                    ptr as *mut u8,
                    len as usize,
                    len as usize,
                )
            });
        }

        state.completed = true;
        state.waker.take()
    };
    // Use the waker to notify the executor this future is completed
    if let Some(waker) = waker {
        waker.wake()
    }

    // Let's try to execute stuff up to the point where there isn't anything else to execute
    get_mut_executor().deref().borrow_mut().run_until_stalled();
}
```

### The complete flow

This is a complete flow of an asynchronous ABI method:

{% mermaid sequenceDiagram %}
participant C as Controller module
participant H as Host

activate C
C ->> H: do_async()
activate H
H ->> C: Returns async operation identifier
C ->> C: run_until_stalled()
deactivate C
Note over H: Waiting for the async result
H ->> C: wakeup_future()
deactivate H
activate C
C ->> C: run_until_stalled()
deactivate C
{% endmermaid %}

You can find the complete code regarding `async`/`await` support here: [`executor.rs`](https://github.com/slinkydeveloper/extending-kubernetes-api-in-process-poc/blob/master/kube-rs/src/abi/executor.rs)

### More async ABI methods!

> After we implemented `async`/`await` in our WASM modules, we refactored the `request` ABI discussed in [our previous post](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope/#The-ABI) as asynchronous ABI method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After we implemented `async`/`await` in our WASM modules, we refactored the `request` ABI discussed in [our previous post](../Kubernetes-controllers-A-New-Hope/#The-ABI) as an asynchronous ABI method:
```

```rust
#[link(wasm_import_module = "http-proxy-abi")]
extern "C" {
    fn request(ptr: *const u8, len: usize) -> u64;
}
```

Now the returned value is the asynchronous operation identifier and, to signal the completion of the request, the host invokes `wakeup_future`.

We also included a new ABI method to sleep the execution of the module:

```rust
#[link(wasm_import_module = "delay-abi")]
extern "C" {
    fn delay(millis: u64) -> u64;
}
```

> This is necessary to run the kube-runtime, which performs some sleeps before synchronizing again the internal cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is necessary to run the kube-runtime, which performs some sleeps before synchronizing the internal cache again.
```

> ## Redesigning the host as event-driven application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Redesigning the host as an event-driven application
```

The first implementation of the new `kube-watch-abi` ABI was a little rough: a lot of blocking threads, shared memory across threads, some unsafe sprinkled here and there to make the code compiling.

> Because of that, we redesigned the host to transform it in a full asynchronous application made of channels and message handlers. For every asynchronous ABI method there is a channel that delivers the _request_ to a message handler, which process the request, computes one or more responses and send them back to another channel. This last channel delivers messages to the `AsyncResultDispatcher`, owner of the module instances, that invokes the `wakeup_future`/`wakeup_stream` of the interested controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of that, we redesigned the host to transform it in a full asynchronous application made of channels and message handlers. For every asynchronous ABI method there is a channel that delivers the _request_ to a message handler, which processes the request, computes one or more responses and sends them back to another channel. This last channel delivers messages to the `AsyncResultDispatcher`, owner of the module instances, that invokes the `wakeup_future`/`wakeup_stream` of the interested controller.
```

Today we have 3 different message handlers, one for each async ABI method:

> * `kube_watch::Watchers` that controls the watch operation. This message handler is also able to dedup the watch operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `kube_watch::Watchers` that controls the watch operation. This message handler is also able to deduplicate the watch operations
```

* `http::start_request_executor` to execute HTTP requests
* `delay::start_delay_executor` to execute delay requests

When the host loads all the modules, it executes the ABI method `run` for each module, then it transfers the ownership of module instances to `AsyncResultDispatcher` that will start listening for new `AsyncResult` messages on its ingress channel.

Because all the message handlers and channels are `async`/`await` based, if all the handlers are in idle, virtually no resource is wasted with threads waiting.

> Since `AsyncResultDispatcher` controls all the different module instances, it avoids invoking in parallel the same controller: `LocalLoop` is a single threaded async task executor, hence a module cannot process in parallel multiple async results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since `AsyncResultDispatcher` controls all the different module instances, it avoids invoking the same controller in parallel: `LocalLoop` is a single threaded async task executor, hence a module cannot process multiple async results in parallel.
```

## Compiling kube-runtime to WASM

Thanks to all the async changes, we managed to realign most of the APIs of `kube-rs` to the original ones. This allowed us to port `kube-runtime` to our WASM controllers.

{% cq %}
The kube_runtime crate contains sets of higher level abstractions on top of the Api and Resource types so that you don't have to do all the watch/resourceVersion/storage book-keeping yourself.
{% endcq %}

The problem we experienced with compiling `kube-runtime` to WASM is that it depends on `tokio::time::DelayQueue`, a queue that yields components up to a specified deadline. `DelayQueue` uses the `Future` type called `Delay` to effectively implement delays. The problem with this `Delay` is that it's implemented using the internal ticker of the Tokio async task executor `Runtime`, which we don't use inside WASM modules.

> In order to fix this issue, we had to fork the implementation of `tokio::time::DelayQueue` and reimplement the `Delay` type using the `delay` ABI showed previously:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to fix this issue, we had to fork the implementation of `tokio::time::DelayQueue` and reimplement the `Delay` type using the `delay` ABI shown previously:
```
